---
draft: false
tags:
title: Chamber Music for Strings
---
     Chamber music originally meant music which was performed in a 'room' rather than a Concert Hall. It is instrumental ensemble music performed by **one player for each part**, as opposed to orchestral music in which there are are several players for each apt. Chamber music can be written for a **Trio (3), Quartet (4), Quintet (5), Sextet (6), Septet (7) or Octet (8)**. String Trios and String Quartets are for stringed instruments only. (Trio - Violin, Viola Cello; Quartet - Violin 1, Violin 2, Viola and Cello). If another instrument is included it is called, for example, Piano Trio (Piano and 2 strings) or Clarinet Quintet (Clarinet and 4 strings). in chamber music the emphasis lies more on the **ensemble** than on the individual players.

At the beginning of the 17th century, instrumental music was developing independently, expanding both in range and technique. English music of this period shows the process of emancipation from the vocal madrigal style. Fantasias in fugal style were derived from the madrigal and early composers of these Fantasias included Byrd and Gibbons. Jenkins evolved a more truly instrumental style in his compositions. The Italian composer, **Corelli**, was one of the first to explore the possibilities of the Violin, which had superseded the Viol, Chand his Sonatas were among the earliest examples of instrumental Chamber music. Bach and Händel wrote Chamber music in which the parts of more equal importance, through a *Continuo*, generally a Harpsichord, was always needed to fill in the harmonies. The harpsichordist, counted on for support by filling in these harmonies, played his so-called *Continuo* from the bass part only, with figures beneath the notes to indicate the harmonies required (a **figured bass**).  The Baroque Chamber work usually consisted of 2 Violins, String Bass and Harpsichord *Continuo*.

Haydn's earliest Chamber music works had a keyboard Continuo which he gradually discarded. Probably one of his greatest achievements was the establishment of the String Quartet as a permanent art work, a form that is regarded as the most perfect musical medium. Haydn was not the inventor of the String Quartet but the **establisher**, and his title *Father of Instrumental Music* is a tribute to his genius in this branch of the art. CPE Bach's Sonatas, which influenced Haydn in the composition of his string quartets, consisted of three movements, quick, slow, quick, none of them being dance movements. Haydn was fond of the Minuet Form, however, so he began to add it to his chamber and orchestral works, completing the **String Quartet Form** as we know it today - **1st Movement** Allegro in Sonata form, **2nd Movement** usually slow, **3rd Movement**, Minuet and Trio, **4th Movement**, fast - Sonata-Rondo form.

The string quartets of Haydn and Mozart established the style and form to which composers to the present day have adhered - the style is individual part writing but without virtuosic elements, and the form is that of a Sonata or Symphony in 4 movements. In chamber music, composers have largely kept to traditions without introducing novel features. **Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven** and **Schubert** are the great **Classical Masters** of chamber music. 

## Haydn
Haydn wrote altogether 83 string quartets, at first composing six at a time and late three at a time. The first great quartets are seen in Op 20. By Op 33 - *Russian* Quartets - Haydn is beginning to give each part a true contrapuntal nature, even introducing a fugue with two subjects - thus liberating the Cello from a mere bass line and making it an independent instrument. By Op 54, Haydn commences to write three quartets at a time.



## Mozart
Mozart explored these effects of scoring even further than Haydn. An orderly musical mind at work and a far wider range of keys and more independent freedom of instruments is seen in Mozart's Chamber music, which is also more contrapuntal and chromatic than that of Haydn. He was also interested in using other instruments in his chamber combinations. Discovering the lovely tone quality of the new instrument, the instrument, the Clarinet, he wrote the Clarinet Trio and the Clarinet Quintet featuring the deep tones of the Chalumeau register. Mozart also gave considerable musical and dramatic significance to Introduction and Coda and used his imaginative genius to make the Development are real test of intellectual power pursued to an aesthetic end. Nothing so reveals a possible weakness in thought or inspiration as the medium of Chamber Music. With no orchestral texture to cloak faults, a composer's thoughts are exposed crystal clear by the few solo instruments. Mozart was one of the greatest masters of this form. His manuscripts were reserved for the friends for whom he wrote them and upon these works he lavished the full flame of his genius. In his Chamber works we find superb technique and mastery of the medium, and passion cloaked in graceful forms. 

## Beethoven
Beethoven's chamber music works in his early period followed Haydn's and Mozart's footsteps, using the same form in his first six string quartets. His true greatness becomes apparent with his middle period quartets, and in the last quartets he almost exhausted the form of its artistic possibilities. Beethoven developed the String Quartet to the highest level of perfection imaginable. His chamber music ranks as one of the wonders of music and covers the whole range of musical emotion. He was able to produce effects with a few instruments that rival emotionally the impact of a fully Symphony Orchestra. 

Beethoven's later quartets require professionals and long hours of practice to master the difficult parts. He was totally deaf when he wrote his late quartets, including the *Grosse Fuge* and he made of them outward expressions of his innermost being, caring nothing for the difficulties of performance. They are the most inspired repertory of chamber music. 

## Schubert
Schubert wrote over 30 chamber works and the spirit of Schubert dwells in them, for they are full of his magic melody lines - he was greatest melodic genius the world has ever known. He was also a master of harmony and his adventurous harmony is the most striking feature of his chamber works. Schubert, like Beethoven had a strong sense of tonality, and at times has some entrancing changes of key. He was especially fond of changing the mode from major to minor, or vice versa, on the same tonic and also liked an abrupt change in a key a major 3rd below the tonic. Some of the most wonderful and widely-loved chamber works in all of music were written by this great composer. 

Mendelssohn, Schumann, Brahms and Dvorak wrote string quartets in which Romanticism enlarged the possibilities of the medium, with its more dramatic if somewhat orchestral idiom of expression. 

## Mendelssohn
Mendelssohn is one of the great writers of chamber music - one of the most delightful pieces being the A Major String Quintet Op 18. The String Octet Op 20 is one of Mendelssohn's best works. His chamber works reveal formalism with his passion for symmetry. His scherzos are particularly happy in effect. He had great facility in composing effective Piano writing in his chamber works. 