---
draft: true
title: HSIE prac
tags: 
creation_date: Monday, February 3rd 2025, 12:59:31 pm
last_edit_date: Sunday, March 23rd 2025, 8:38:27 pm
---

# V1

The Industrial Revolution brought rapid advancements in technology. These advancements revolutionised the way good were produced. The Industrial Revolution also led to harsher working conditions, and lead to a growing economic inequality. There were a group of many skilled textile workers known as the Luddites. The growing mechanisation of the industry threatened their livelihoods and employment, which resulted in them resisting these changes. They resisted these changes by destroying machines that were put in place, also known as frame breaking. This movement was also known as Luddism. When the government saw this, they retaliated against the Luddites as they saw the Luddites as barriers to industrial progress. This resulted in the British government carrying out harsh punishments for frame-breaking such as execution or transportation to Australia. This decreased the chances of any further rebellions. This essay will explore three key reasons behind the Luddites' transportation to Australia; the impact of industrialisation on employment, the government's efforts to protect the growing industry and the use of transportation as a prevention tool. This issue of the Luddites remains relevant even to this day. There were three main factors in the governments decision for transportation of the luddites; political, social and economic pressures.

The Luddites were subjected to transportation as their actions presented a great challenge to the process of Britain's industrialisation. The industrialisation of Britain prioritised efficiency and profit over the labourers' health and the labourers' welfare. As the development of the textile industry occurred, textile manufacturing was made possible through machines. This development reduced the demand for manual laboured. This rendered countless labourers, such as the Luddites, jobless. It also made them inadequately compensated. Lord Byron captured this in his speech in 1812 to the House of Lords. He described the workers as 'emaciated from starvation...'. (Source 1) This captured the desperation of the workers without a job. This was a reality as a result of the ignorance of the authorities. The authorities were intent on protecting the mechanised industry. The unwillingness to address workers' suffering had a consequence, which resulted in a riot. This led the government to crack down on dissent, wit the aim of protecting industrial progress. It became clear that the government had a priority of the excessive profits over the root causes of discontent, which were the conditions of the workers and the unemployment of labourers.

The government held the view of the Luddites as significant threat to the textile industry and the economic stability. This prompted the government to respond with severe repression towards the Luddites. The government saw machine-breaking as beyond simple factory vandalism and posing a challenge to Britain's vision of progress. In this vision, mechanisation and profit were paramount. These things overshowed much more important things like workers' livelihoods. This growing threat triggered a state response, shown by the reward notice from the government (Source 2). The notice was issued in March of 1811 and offered 50 guineas for the information of anyone 'wickedly breaking the Frames'. This was a clear demonstration of the government's priorities of profits and industrialism. They prioritised this over the wellbeing of the workers which greatly intensified the threats. One key person in this protest was Ned Ludd. He sent threatening letters to mill owners, warning of machine destruction. He also warned of mill burnings, in one of his letters, Ned Ludd threatened to send 'one of his lieutenants would come with at least 300 men to destroy shearing frames and burn them to ashes' (Source 4). This climate of fear and rebellion reinforced the government's opinion of seeing the Luddites as dangerous rebels. These rebels had to be eliminated, which was necessary to preserve the national stability. They enforced strict measures and the punishment of the deportations, which addressed the industrial dissent and preventing any future rebellions.

Transportation served a dual purpose for the government. It was a strategic tool used to suppress conflict by bringing them away from the mainland and was used to instil fear among potential rebels. Instead of executing all the Luddites, authorities made a choice to exile many to Australia. This action had a specific effect, which weakened the movement and deterred further and potential uprisings. The World History Encyclopedia states 'those protestors who were caught faced harsh penalties which included hanging and deportation to Australia' (Source 3). This highlights the severe consequences which resulted from resisting industrialisation. This policy and strategy of penal transportation had a purpose, not just for punishment, but was a barrier, a barrier designed to isolate dissenters and eliminate rebellious influence back in Britain. It was aimed to secure the dominance of the growing machine based industry and the textile industry. This also demonstrated the power and reach of the British Empire, using transportation as a tool of punishment and a tool of imperial control.

The Industrial Revolution had certain effects like aggravating unemployment and aggravating inequality among skilled textile workers. This situation prompted the rise of Luddism which the British government responded to by deporting them to Australia. This action showed the government prioritising industrial stability over the livelihoods of the labourers. By exiling the Luddites, authorities aimed to achieve certain goals like supressing opposition, deterring resistance and securing the dominance of the newly developing mechanised industry.

# V2

The Industrial Revolution brought rapid advancements in technology, especially in the textile industry. These advancements revolutionised the way that goods were produced. Along with the benefits of the Industrial Revolution, it also led to harsher working conditions for the labourers, led to a growing economic inequality. Many skilled textile known as the Luddites feared employment and poverty because of the mechanisation of the textile industry. The Luddites resisted these changes by destroying the machines that threatened their livelihoods, also known as frame breaking. This movement was known as Luddism. As a result, the government retaliated against the Luddites as they saw the Luddites as barriers to industrial progress. The British government carried out cruel punishments including execution and transportation to Australia. The government aimed to decrease the chances of further rebellion. This essay will explore three key reasons behind the transportation of the Luddites; the impact of industrialisation on employment, the government's efforts to protect industry and the use of transportation as a prevention tool. There were a few reasons as to what made transportation the government's preferred solution; political, social and economic pressures.

The Luddites were subjected to transportation because their actions present a great challenge to the process of Britain's industrialisation. Industrialisation prioritised efficiency and profit over the labourers' health and welfare. The development of textile production through machines reduced the demand for manual labour. This made countless labourers jobless and unemployed and uncompensated. Lord Byron captured this desperation through his 1812 speech to the House of Lords which also reflected the social attitudes of the time, painting a vivid image of starving men. He described them as 'emaciated from starvation...' (Source 1) This was a reality that was ignored by authorities. The authorities focused on protecting mechanised industry, being unwilling to address workers' suffering. This had a great consequence, resulting in the Luddites' uprising and riots, which lead the government to crack down on the dissent. This was done to protect industrial progress. It became clear that the government had a priority. They valued industrial stability more than the addressing the root causes of discontent. The uprising due to the employment status of the Industrial Revolution was one of the key reasons resulting in the transportation of the Luddites to Australia.

The government was going to great lengths to protect the fast-developing textile industry. The government saw the Luddites as a significant threat to the development of the textile industry, and the expansion of the industry. This prompted the government to respond with severe repression. Machine-went beyond simple factory vandalism. It posed a challenge to Britain's vision of progress in the textile industry. In this vision, mechanisation was paramount. Profit was also important towards the government. The government overlooked the workers' livelihoods and their growing threat triggered a state response. This is shown by a reward notice by the government in Source 2. This notice was issued in March of 1811 which offered 50 guineas for information about anyone 'wickedly breaking the Frames'. This was a clear demonstration of the government's priorities and their desperation in the protection of the textile industry. A significant figure in the intensification of these threats was Ned Ludd. He sent threatening letters to mill owners warning of machine destruction and burnings. '...one of his lieutenants with at least 300 men and destroy shearing frames and burn them to ashes.' (Source 4) This instilled fear upon the government and reinforced the government's opinion. They knew that the Luddites had to be eliminated in one way or the other. This was necessary to preserve the national stability. Therefore, they enforced strict measures in deportation to Australia, discouraging future uprisings. Britain's efforts to protect the growing industry was a key factor of the transportation of the Luddites to Australia.

Transportation was strategically used as a tool to suppress conflict and to instil fear among potential rebels, serving a dual '' purpose for the government. Instead of executing all of the captured Luddites, authorities made a choice, they chose to exile many to Australia, which weakened the Luddite movement by removing its leaders. This also prevented further uprisings. Further evidence is stated by the World History Encyclopedia (Source 3) 'Those protestors who were caught faced harsh penalties that included hanging or deportation to Australia.' This highlights the severe consequences resulting from a resisting industrialisation. This policy of penal transportation was more than just a punishment, it was a barrier. This barrier was designed to eliminate rebellious influence and is9olate dissenters. It also aimed to secure the dominance of machine-based industry. It also demonstrated something else, the power and reach of the British Empire. The Empire used transportation as a tool of punishment and of imperial control.

The Industrial Revolution had certain effects on the citizens of Britain. It aggravated unemployment and inequality among skilled textile workers. This situation prompted the rise of Luddism, which the British Government responded in mass transportation of the Luddites to Australia. By exiling the Luddites, the authorities aimed to achieve certain goals, to suppress opposition, to deter further resistance and the dominance of the mechanised industry.
