---
draft: false
title: HSIE PRAC (1)
tags:
creation_date: Monday, February 3rd 2025, 12:59:31 pm
last_edit_date: Sunday, March 23rd 2025, 5:56:35 pm
---
The Industrial Revolution brought rapid advancements in technology. These advancements revolutionised the way good were produced. The Industrial Revolution also led to harsher working conditions, and lead to a growing economic inequality. There were a group of many skilled textile workers known as the Luddites. The growing mechanisation of the industry threatened their livelihoods and employment, which resulted in them resisting these changes. They resisted these changes by destroying machines that were put in place, also known as frame breaking. This movement was also known as Luddism. When the government saw this, they retaliated against the Luddites as they saw the Luddites as barriers to industrial progress. This resulted in the British government carrying out harsh punishments for frame-breaking such as execution or transportation to Australia. This decreased the chances of any further rebellions. This essay will explore three key reasons behind the Luddites' transportation to Australia; the impact of industrialisation on employment, the government's efforts to protect the growing industry and the use of transportation as a prevention tool. This issue of the Luddites remains relevant even to this day. There were three main factors in the governments decision for transportation of the luddites; political, social and economic pressures.

The Luddites were subjected to transportation as their actions presented a great challenge to the process of Britain's industrialisation. The industrialisation of Britain prioritised efficiency and profit over the labourers' health and the labourers' welfare. As the development of the textile industry occurred, textile manufacturing was made possible through machines. This development reduced the demand for manual laboured. This rendered countless labourers, such as the Luddites, jobless. It also made them inadequately compensated. Lord Byron captured this in his speech in 1812 to the House of Lords. He described the workers as 'emaciated from starvation...'. (Source 1) This captured the desperation of the workers without a job. This was a reality as a result of the ignorance of the authorities. The authorities were intent on protecting the mechanised industry. The unwillingness to address workers' suffering had a consequence, which resulted in a riot. This led the government to crack down on dissent, wit the aim of protecting industrial progress. It became clear that the government had a priority of the excessive profits over the root causes of discontent, which were the conditions of the workers and the unemployment of labourers.

The government held the view of the Luddites as significant threat to the textile industry and the economic stability. This prompted the government to respond with severe repression towards the Luddites. The government saw machine-breaking as beyond simple factory vandalism and posing a challenge to Britain's vision of progress. In this vision, mechanisation and profit were paramount. These things overshowed much more important things like workers' livelihoods. This growing threat triggered a state response, shown by the reward notice from the government (Source 2). The notice was issued in March of 1811 and offered 50 guineas for the information of anyone 'wickedly breaking the Frames'. This was a clear demonstration of the government's priorities of profits and industrialism. They prioritised this over the wellbeing of the workers which greatly intensified the threats. One key person in this protest was Ned Ludd. He sent threatening letters to mill owners, warning of machine destruction. He also warned of mill burnings, in one of his letters, Ned Ludd threatened to send 'one of his lieutenants would come with at least 300 men to destroy shearing frames and burn them to ashes' (Source 4). This climate of fear and rebellion reinforced the government's opinion of seeing the Luddites as dangerous rebels. These rebels had to be eliminated, which was necessary to preserve the national stability. They enforced strict measures and the punishment of the deportations, which addressed the industrial dissent and preventing any future rebellions.

Transportation served a dual purpose for the government. It was a strategia tool used to suppress conflict by bringing them away from the mainland and was used to instil fear among potential rebels. Instead of executing all the Luddites, authorities made a choice to exile many to Australia. This action had a specific effect, which weakened the movement and deterred further and potential uprisings. The World History Encyclopedia states 'those protestors who were caught faced harsh penalties which included hanging and deportation to Australia' (Source 3). This highlights the severe consequences which resulted from resisting industrialisation. This policy and strategy of penal transportation had a purpose, not just for punishment, but was a barrier, a barrier designed to isolate dissenters and eliminate rebellious influence back in Britain. It was aimed to secure the dominance of the growing machine based industry and the textile industry. This also demonstrated the power and reach of the British Empire, using transportation as a tool of punishment and a tool of imperial control.